Updates for the statistics usability enhancement feature (predicate columns, config persistence, synchronous loading) (#7412)
pingcap/docs: statistics.md

>
> Normally, `STATS_META` is more credible than `TABLE_KEYS`. However, after importing data through the methods like [TiDB Lightning](/tidb-lightning/tidb-lightning-overview.md), the result of `STATS_META` is `0`. To handle this situation, you can use `TABLE_KEYS` to calculate the sampling rate when the result of `STATS_META` is much smaller than the result of `TABLE_KEYS`.

##### Collect statistics on some columns

In most cases, when executing SQL statements, the optimizer only uses statistics of some columns (such as columns in the `WHERE`, `JOIN`, `ORDER BY`, and `GROUP BY` statements). These columns are called `PREDICATE COLUMNS`.

> If a table has many columns, collecting statistics on all the columns can cause a large overhead. To reduce the overhead, you can collect statistics on only specified columns or `PREDICATE COLUMNS` to be used by the optimizer.

Reviewer: the specified columns?

Author: I've updated it to "specific columns".

> **Note:**
>
> Collecting statistics on some columns is only applicable for `tidb_analyze_version = 2`.

> - To collect statistics on specified columns, use the following syntax:

Reviewer: ditto

Author: done.

    > **Note:**
    >
    > The syntax above is a full collection. For example, after using this syntax to collect statistics for columns `a` and `b`, if you want to collect statistics for column `c` as well, you need to specify all three columns using `ANALYZE table t columns a, b, c`, rather than only specifying the additional column `c` using `ANALYZE TABLE t COLUMNS c`.

- To collect statistics for `PREDICATE COLUMNS`, do the following:

    > **Warning:**
    >
    > Currently, collecting statistics for `PREDICATE COLUMNS` is an experimental feature. It is not recommended that you use it in production environments.

    1. Set the value of the [`tidb_enable_column_tracking`](/system-variables.md#tidb_enable_column_tracking-introduced-from-v540-version) system variable to `ON` to enable TiDB to collect `PREDICATE COLUMNS`.

        After the setting, TiDB writes the `PREDICATE COLUMNS` information to the `mysql.column_stats_usage` system table every 100 * [`stats-lease`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-lease).

>     2. After the query pattern of your business is stable, collect the statistics of `PREDICATE COLUMNS` by using the following syntax:

Author: It means the different query types with different predicates.

- When TiDB collects statistics automatically or when you manually collect statistics by executing the `ANALYZE` statement without specifying the column configuration, TiDB continues using the previously persisted configuration for statistics collection.
- When you manually execute the `ANALYZE` statement multiple times and specify the column configuration each time, TiDB overwrites the previously recorded persistent configuration using the new configuration specified by the latest `ANALYZE` statement.

If you want to see which columns in a table are `PREDICATE COLUMNS` and the statistics for which columns have been collected, you can use the following syntax.

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SHOW COLUMN_STATS_USAGE [ShowLikeOrWhere];
```

The `SHOW COLUMN_STATS_USAGE` statement returns the following 6 columns:

> | Column name | Description            |

Author: It should be "Column name here". The Chinese version here is incorrect. @xuyifangreeneyes PTAL.

> | Column name | Description            |

Reviewer: I check other `SHOW`s and they also use 语法元素 in Chinese and Syntax Element in English.

> | Column name | Description            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Syntax Element | Description            |
```

> | Column name | Description            |

Author: I don't think the "语法元素“ in Chinese is correct because "语法元素“ or "syntax" is used for command input, while we are now introducing the column names in the output of the `Show` statement.

| -------- | ------------- |
| `Db_name`  |  The database name    |
| `Table_name` | The table name |
| `Partition_name` | The partition name |
| `Column_name` | The column name |

> | `Last_used_at` | The last time when the column statistics were used by the query optimization |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `Last_used_at` | The last time when the column statistics were used in the query optimization |
```

> **Note:**
>
> To ensure that the statistical information before and after the collection is consistent, when `tidb_analyze_version=2` is set, this syntax collects statistics for the entire table (including all columns and all indexes) instead of only for indexes.

##### Collect statistics for partitions

- To collect statistics for all partitions in the `PartitionNameList` in `TableName`, use the following syntax:

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    ANALYZE TABLE TableName PARTITION PartitionNameList [WITH NUM BUCKETS|TOPN|CMSKETCH DEPTH|CMSKETCH WIDTH]|[WITH NUM SAMPLES|WITH FLOATNUM SAMPLERATE];
    ```

- To collect index statistics for all partitions in the `PartitionNameList` in `TableName`, use the following syntax.

    {{< copyable "sql" >}}

    ```sql
    ANALYZE TABLE TableName PARTITION PartitionNameList INDEX [IndexNameList] [WITH NUM BUCKETS|TOPN|CMSKETCH DEPTH|CMSKETCH WIDTH]|[WITH NUM SAMPLES|WITH FLOATNUM SAMPLERATE];
    ```

- When collecting statistics for partitions, if you only need to [collect statistics for some columns](/statistics.md# collect statistics for some columns), use the following syntax:

    > **Warning:**
    >

>     > Currently, collecting statistics for `PREDICATE COLUMNS` is an experimental feature. It is not recommended that you use it in production environments.

Author: ditto

When you analyze index columns, you can use the `tidb_index_serial_scan_concurrency` parameter to control the number of Region to be read at one time. The default value is `1`.

### Persist ANALYZE configurations

> Since v5.4.0, TiDB supports persisting some `ANALYZE` configurations. With this feature, the existing configurations can be easily reused for future statistics collection.

Author: Rejected. Because the existing configurations can be easily reused by users or TiDB, only mentioning "you can" is insufficient.

| The number of samples | WITH NUM SAMPLES |
| The sampling rate | WITH FLOATNUM SAMPLERATE |
| The `ANALYZE` column type | AnalyzeColumnOption ::= ( 'ALL COLUMNS' \| 'PREDICATE COLUMNS' \| 'COLUMNS' ColumnNameList ) |
| The `ANALYZE` column | ColumnNameList ::= Identifier ( ',' Identifier )* |

#### Enable ANALYZE configuration persistence

The `ANALYZE` configuration persistence feature is enabled by default (the system variable `tidb_analyze_version` is `2` and `tidb_persist_analyze_options` is `ON` by default). You can use this feature to record the persistence configurations specified in the `ANALYZE` statement when executing the statement manually. Once recorded, the next time TiDB automatically updates statistics or you manually collect statistics without specifying these configuration, TiDB will collect statistics according to the recorded configurations.

When you manually execute the `ANALYZE` statement multiple times with persistence configurations specified, TiDB overwrites the previously recorded persistent configuration using the new configurations specified by the latest `ANALYZE` statement.

#### Disable ANALYZE configuration persistence

> To disable the `ANALYZE` configuration persistence feature, set the `tidb_persist_analyze_options` system variable to `OFF`. Because the `ANALYZE` configuration persistence feature is not applicable to `tidb_analyze_version = 1`, setting `tidb_analyze_version = 1` can turn off the feature too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To disable the `ANALYZE` configuration persistence feature, set the `tidb_persist_analyze_options` system variable to `OFF`. Because the `ANALYZE` configuration persistence feature is not applicable to `tidb_analyze_version = 1`, setting `tidb_analyze_version = 1` can also disable the feature.
```

The statement deletes statistics of all the tables in `TableName`.

## Load statistics

By default, depending on the different size of the space that column statistics consume, TiDB loads statistics differently as follows:

- For the statistics that consume a small space (such as count, distinctCount, and nullCount), as long as the column data is updated, TiDB automatically loads the corresponding statistics into memory for use in the SQL optimization stage.
- For the statistics that consume a large space (such as histogram, TopN, and Count-Min Sketch), to ensure the performance of SQL execution, TiDB loads the statistics asynchronously on demand. Take the histogram as an example. Only when the optimization of a SQL statement uses the histogram statistics of a column, TiDB loads the histogram statistics of that column into memory. The advantage of on-demand asynchronous loading is that loading statistics does not affect the performance of SQL execution, but the disadvantage is that TiDB might use incomplete statistics for SQL optimization.

> Since v5.4.0, TiDB introduces the synchronously loading statistics feature. With the feature, TiDB can synchronously load statistics with a large space consumption (such as histogram, TopN, and Count-Min Sketch statistics) into memory when you execute SQL statements, which improves the completeness of statistics for SQL optimization.

Author: This feature cannot ensure the completeness of statistics in the case of load timeout.

> **Warning:**
>

> > Currently, synchronously loading statistics is an experimental feature. It is not recommended that you use it in production environments.

Author: ditto

The synchronously loading statistics feature is disabled by default. To enable this feature, set the value of the [`tidb_stats_load_sync_wait`](/system-variables.md#tidb_stats_load_sync_wait-new-in-v540) system variable to a timeout (in milliseconds) that SQL optimization can wait for at most to synchronously load complete column statistics. The default value of this variable is `0`, indicating that the feature is disabled.

After enabling the synchronously loading statistics feature, you can further configure the feature as follows:

> - To control how TiDB behaves when the waiting time of SQL optimization reaches the timeout, modify the value of the [`tidb_stats_load_pseudo_timeout`](/system-variables.md#tidb_stats_load_pseudo_timeout-new-in-v540) system variable. The default value of this variable is `OFF`, indicating that the SQL execution fails after the timeout. If you set this variable to `ON`, after the timeout, the entire SQL optimization process does not use any histogram, TopN, or CMSketch statistics of any columns, but gets back to using pseudo statistics.

Author: rejected
reason: get back to doing something
https://idioms.thefreedictionary.com/get+back+to+doing+something#:~:text=To%20take%20up%20some%20activity,after%20some%20hiatus%20or%20interruption.

- To specify the maximum column number that the synchronously loading statistics feature can process concurrently, modify the value of the [`stats-load-concurrency`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-load-concurrency-new-in-v540) option in the TiDB configuration file. The default value is `5`.

> - To specify the maximum column number of requests that the synchronously loading statistics feature can cache, modify the value of the [`stats-load-queue-size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-load-queue-size-new-in-v540) option in the TiDB configuration file. The default value is `1000`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- To specify the maximum number of columns of which requests can be cached by the synchronously loading statistics feature, modify the value of the [`stats-load-queue-size`](/tidb-configuration-file.md#stats-load-queue-size-new-in-v540) option in the TiDB configuration file. The default value is `1000`.
```
